The Union government on Tuesday (December 3, 2024) told the Lok Sabha that “growing awareness, wider publicity, and capacity building of police personnel” were among the reasons for the increasing number of cases being registered across the country under the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act.

Data from the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) show that over 67,000 cases had been registered in 2022 under the SC/ST Act for crimes of atrocities against people belonging to Scheduled Castes (SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST). This is the highest number of cases registered under this Act since 2013, according to the NCRB data provided by the Social Justice Ministry.

Among these cases, 57,582 cases were registered with regard to atrocities against people belonging to SC communities, and 10,064 cases were registered with regard to atrocities against people from ST communities.

Social Justice Minister Virendra Kumar laid a statement on the Table of the House on Tuesday, providing this data along with measures the government is taking to ensure the implementation of laws that protect SCs and STs against discrimination. The statement came in response to a question from Janata Dal-United (JD-U) MP Alok Kumar Suman, on discrimination against SCs and STs in the past 10 years.

Mr. Suman had asked the government to also provide data with regards to discrimination in Central Universities, the Indian Institutes of Technology, the Indian Institutes of Management, the All India Institutes of Medical Science, and public sector undertakings. “Data regarding discrimination against SCs/STs in the educational institutions and public sector units in not centrally maintained,” the Social Justice Minister said in response.

Mr. Kumar, however, added that various steps had been taken to “reduce discrimination” against SCs and STs in Central Universities, which included setting up SC/ST cells, equal opportunity cells, student grievance cells, and appointing Liaison Officers.

The government said that two Acts had been enacted to protect people of the SC and ST communities from discrimination, namely, the Protection of Civil Rights Act of 1955, and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act of 1989. The government added that to ensure effective implementation of these laws, the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment was running a centrally sponsored scheme and a National Helpline Against Atrocities.

In addition, the government said that the National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes provided safeguards against the exploitation of SCs and STs, and sought to “promote and protect their social, educational, economic and cultural interests respectively”.