Former Punjab Deputy Chief Minister and Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) leader Sukhbir Singh Badal on Wednesday averted an assassination bid, after a former militant and pro-Khalistan sympathiser opened fire at him outside the Golden Temple in Punjab’s Amritsar, where he was performing penance for his ‘mistakes’.

Also Read: Attack on Sukhbir Badal attempt to finish moderate space in Punjab, says Akali Dal leader Naresh Gujral

Mr. Badal escaped unhurt in the incident even as the accused was overpowered by security police personnel standing close to Mr. Badal, who was in a wheelchair owing to a fractured leg. He was sitting at the entrance of the Golden Temple, attired in the dress of a sewadar performing the penance, when the accused person drew a gun to shoot.

Gunshots fired at Sukhbir Singh Badal outside Golden Temple

According to the police, the accused has been identified as Narain Singh Chaura, who is a former militant-terrorist.

“The shooter Narain Singh Chaura is a former terrorist and a criminal. He has been arrested and the weapon, a pistol has been recovered. We have registered an FIR. We will deeply investigate the matter and ensure that no angle stays uncovered. We are even probing the angle of ‘gaining sympathy’,” Gurpreet Singh Bhullar, Police Commissioner, Amritsar city said.

Mr. Singh said the police personnel foiled the bid by intercepting the accused when he attempted to fire the shot, deflecting the gunshot.

Mr. Chaura is reportedly the founding member of the now inactive Khalistan Liberation Army, a pro-Khalistan group.

The incident drew sharp criticism from the Opposition parties including Shiromani Akali Dal, the Congress and the Bharatiya Janta Party, raising questions surrounding the poor law and order situation in Punjab, even as the ruling Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) government patted the Punjab Police “for foiling a deep-rooted conspiracy to defame Punjab”.

Senior SAD leader and former Minister Daljit Singh Cheema said the incident is condemnable and speaks volumes about Punjab’s poor law and order. “Mr. Badal is safe and the attacker - Narain Singh Chaura - has been held but the incident has put a big question mark on Punjab law and order situation. I would like to ask Chief Minister Bhagwant Mann where Punjab is being pushed. The attack shows the poor law and order situation prevailing in the State. The Chief Minister should immediately resign,” Mr. Cheema said, speaking to journalists after the incident in Amritsar.

Demanding a high-level judicial probe into the incident, Mr. Cheema said “We don’t have any faith in the State government. Conspiracies are being hatched to demolish the leadership of Akali Dal. It’s not just about the man who fired but the entire conspiracy behind the incident needs to be exposed.”

Senior Congress leader and Leader of Opposition, Partap Singh Bajwa, said the incident is a stark reminder of the need for responsible discourse and vigilance in Punjab. “The attack is a grim reminder of the deteriorating law and order situation in Punjab. Such incidents undermine the very fabric of societal harmony and have no place in a civilised society,” said Mr. Bajwa.

BJP national general secretary Tarun Chugh condemned the incident, saying the incident underscores a complete breakdown of law and order under the Bhagwant Mann-led government in Punjab.

Meanwhile, Punjab Chief Minister Bhagwant Singh Mann appreciated the Punjab Police “for foiling a deep-rooted conspiracy to defame Punjab” by vigilantly preventing an attack on Mr. Badal.

Speaking to journalists, the Chief Minister condemned the attack, saying he is keeping a regular tab over the entire incident and has directed officers to maintain maximum vigil against anti-social elements. Mr. Mann said the Director General of Police has been directed to conduct a thorough probe into the matter.

Akal Takht – the highest Sikh temporal seat on December 2, awarded religious punishment to Sukhbir Singh Badal and several other Akali Dal leaders, who were part of the SAD-led government between 2007 and 2017 in Punjab and were found to be tankhaiya or guilty of religious misconduct. Mr. Badal and other leaders were directed to perform different duties including cleaning the utensils and shoes of devotees, etc.

Before the pronouncement of punishments, Mr. Badal admitted the mistakes, which included the pardoning granted to Sirsa-based Dera Sacha Sauda chief Gurmeet Ram Rahim in a 2007 blasphemy case, failure of the then SAD-led government to punish those involved in the sacrilege of Guru Granth Sahib at Bargari village in 2015, among others.