Terming mistreatment of minorities as a ‘reprehensible act’, Shahi Imam of Delhi’s Jama Masjid, Syed Ahmed Bukhari, on Tuesday (December 3, 2024) asked the Bangladesh government to stop injustices and assaults against Hindus in the country.

Condemning the assault and unilateral actions against the minority community in the neighbourhood, Mr. Bhukari said there was no justification for such actions.

He said the United Nations had a universal declaration regarding the protection of equal rights for minorities, which was binding on all members of the international community and all UN member-states.

“Wherever in the world there is any form of oppression, coercion, prejudice and hatred against minorities or issues related to their fundamental rights and participation, it is the right of every nation, under international laws and regulations, to raise questions about it. As a credible neighbour, a close ally of Bangladesh, and a custodian of shared cultural heritage, I expect the current head of Bangladesh, Muhammad Yunus, a Nobel laureate, to take immediate steps to curb any injustices against the Hindu minority,” Mr. Bukhari added.

He said that after former Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s departure to India, the backlash against her saw both Muslim and non-Muslim supporters of the Awami League becoming targets of the unrest that erupted following her removal.

“Up to this point, it remained an internal matter of Bangladesh. However, the ongoing injustices, assaults, and unilateral actions against the Hindu minority are condemnable and must stop immediately,” he added.

Mr. Bukhari said Mr. Yunus should ensure that his international reputation remained untarnished because as a Muslim-majority country, Islam and Islamic jurisprudence inherently leave no room for any form of prejudice or injustice against minorities in Bangladesh.

He also reminded the Bangladesh government that it must always acknowledge the role India had played in their establishment, development process, and the unparalleled history of our support and care for millions of refugees.

“We are the first to stand by them in every natural disaster,” he said.