French President Emmanuel Macron announced on Tuesday (December 3, 2024) that he and Saudi Arabia's de facto ruler, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, would co-chair a conference on the establishment of a Palestinian state in June.

"We have decided to co-chair a conference for the two states in June next year," Mr. Macron said, referring to Israel and a potential Palestinian state.

"In the coming months, together we will multiply and combine our diplomatic initiatives to bring everyone along this path," he added.

Responding to a question on whether France would recognise a Palestinian state, the French president said he would do so "at the right moment" and at a time "when it triggers reciprocal movements of recognition".

"We want to involve several other partners and allies, both European and non-European, who are ready to move in this direction but who are waiting for France," he added.

Mr. Macron said the aim was to "trigger a movement of recognition in favour of Israel," which he said could "provide answers in terms of security for Israel and convince people that the two-state solution is a solution that is relevant for Israel".

Saudi Arabia had appeared close to a deal to normalise relations with Israel as part of a package that would include security guarantees from the United States, prior to Hamas's October 7, 2023 attack which has sparked nearly 14 months of war in Gaza.

Recognition by Saudi Arabia would be a landmark moment in the acceptance of Israel as the kingdom is the guardian of Islam's two holiest sites.

But Riyadh has indicated it is unwilling to move ahead while Israel pursues its campaign in Gaza, hardening its position in recent months and saying it would not recognise Israel without an independent Palestinian state.

The announcement on Tuesday (December 3, 2024) came as the U.N. General Assembly was due to vote later in the day on convening an international conference in June aimed at advancing the two-state solution as part of its annual review of the Palestinian question.

Calls for a two-state solution, on the basis of a Palestinian state established alongside Israel, have grown since the outbreak of the war in Gaza.

In September, Spain hosted a meeting of European officials and ministers from Muslim nations including Saudi Arabia, after Madrid, alongside Ireland and Norway, formally recognised a Palestinian state comprising the Gaza Strip and the West Bank earlier in the year.